README.md, before:

# Telos: Purpose-Driven Multi-Agent Development Framework

[![npm version](https://badge.fury.io/js/telos-framework.svg)](https://www.npmjs.com/package/telos-framework)
[![License: MIT](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-MIT-yellow.svg)](https://opensource.org/licenses/MIT)
[![Node.js Version](https://img.shields.io/node/v/telos-framework)](https://nodejs.org)
[![Tests](https://img.shields.io/badge/tests-29%20passing-brightgreen)]()

A philosophically-grounded AI collective that embeds Aristotelian purpose
hierarchy into software development. Every line of code serves your ultimate
mission.

## Philosophy

**Telos** (Greek: τέλος) means "end," "purpose," or "goal"—the ultimate reason
something exists.

**Logos** (Greek: λόγος) means "reason," "discourse," or "rational
principle"—the organizing intelligence that maintains coherent order.

Most development tools focus on _how_ to code. Telos ensures you're building the
_right_ thing by maintaining alignment between implementation and purpose across
nine levels of abstraction—from syntax to transcendent meaning.

Based on Kenneth Boulding's hierarchy of system complexity, Telos orchestrates
specialized AI agents that operate coherently from low-level linting to
strategic vision. The **Logos orchestrator** uses rational discourse to maintain
top-down purpose alignment and bottom-up validation.

## Architecture

### The Nine Levels

```
L9: Telos-Guardian      → Strategic alignment with ultimate purpose
L8: Market-Analyst      → Business metrics and KPIs
L7: Insight-Synthesizer → User feedback and behavioral analytics
L6: UX-Simulator        → User experience and accessibility
L5: Journey-Validator   → End-to-end workflows and integration
L4: Integration-Contractor → API contracts and service boundaries
L3: Component-Architect → Component design and composition
L2: Function-Author     → Unit logic and TDD
L1: Syntax-Linter       → Code structure and formatting
```

### Logos Orchestrator

The central orchestration engine implementing:

- **Top-down decomposition**: Strategic goals cascade into tactical specs
- **Bottom-up validation**: Implementation validates against purpose
- **Middle-out reconciliation**: Conflicts resolved through rational dialogue
- **Spec-driven workflow**: All changes flow through OpenSpec proposals

## Installation

```bash
npx telos-framework init
```

Or install globally:

```bash
npm install -g telos-framework
telos init
```

## Quick Start

### 1. Install Telos Commands

```bash
cd your-project
telos init
```

This installs Telos slash commands to `.claude/commands/telos/` and sets up
`AGENTS.md` and `CLAUDE.md` templates.

### 2. Initialize with AI

Open your project in Claude Code (or your AI coding assistant) and run:

```
/telos-init
```

The AI will:

- Analyze your codebase (README, package files, source structure)
- Propose a complete 9-level purpose hierarchy
- Auto-generate technical layers (L1-L4) from detected tools
- Ask you to review strategic layers (L9-L5)
- Generate all agent definitions and configuration files

**Time: ~2 minutes** (vs. 10 minutes with CLI prompts)

### 3. Start Development

Your AI assistants now operate as a coherent multi-agent collective:

```
User: "Add user authentication"
  ↓
L9 Telos-Guardian: Validates alignment with project purpose
  ↓
L8 Market-Analyst: Defines success metrics
  ↓
... (decomposition cascade)
  ↓
L2 Function-Author: Implements with TDD
  ↓
L1 Syntax-Linter: Ensures code quality
  ↓
(Bottom-up validation confirms alignment)
```

### 4. Validate Alignment

```
/telos-validate
```

Check that all work traces back to your ultimate Telos.

## Features

### Adaptive Tool Integration

Telos discovers and integrates your existing tools:

- Linters (ESLint, Ruff, etc.)
- Test frameworks (Vitest, Jest, Playwright)
- Analytics (PostHog, Amplitude)
- MCP servers
- Custom tooling

### Multi-Platform Support

Works with:

- Claude (Code, Projects)
- Cursor
- GitHub Copilot
- Google Gemini
- Any AI coding assistant

Single source of truth with platform-specific symlinks—no duplication.

### OpenSpec Integration

Full integration with [OpenSpec](https://openspec.dev) workflow:

- Logos creates proposals for changes
- Agents work through specs and tasks
- Validation uses OpenSpec archive
- Telos lineage tracked throughout

### Technical Agent Delegation

9-level agents can delegate to specialized technical agents from
[Claude Collective](https://github.com/alan-colver/claude-code-collective):

- `research-agent` for technical investigation
- `quality-agent` for comprehensive reviews
- `testing-implementation-agent` for test suites
- `devops-agent` for deployment
- And more specialized agents

## Commands

### CLI Commands

```bash
telos init              # Install Telos slash commands and memory files
telos --help            # Show all commands
```

### Slash Commands (AI-Native)

Use these in Claude Code, OpenCode, or Cursor:

```
/telos-init             # Initialize Telos with AI-driven analysis
/telos-quick            # Fast initialization (auto-accept AI proposals)
/telos-validate         # Check code alignment with purpose hierarchy
/telos-status           # Show current Telos configuration
/telos-reset            # Clear and reinitialize
```

## Project Structure

After initialization:

```
your-project/
├── telos/
│   ├── content/
│   │   ├── TELOS.md         # Your project's purpose hierarchy
│   │   ├── AGENTS.md        # Consolidated agent definitions
│   │   ├── LOGOS.md         # Orchestrator instructions
│   │   └── TOOLS.md         # Tool registry and mappings
│   ├── agents/              # Individual agent definitions (L1-L9)
│   └── templates/           # Platform-specific configs
├── .telos/                  # Runtime state (gitignored)
├── TELOS.md                 # Symlink for visibility
└── [platform symlinks]      # CLAUDE.md, .cursor/rules/, etc.
```

## Philosophy & Theory

### Why Hierarchical Agents?

Flat agent collectives lack governance—agents can work at cross-purposes.
Hierarchical organization with clear level boundaries ensures:

- Strategic coherence (top-down)
- Implementation integrity (bottom-up)
- Efficient specialization (right tool, right level)

### Why Telos?

Without explicit purpose capture, AI assistants optimize for immediate requests,
not ultimate goals. Telos makes purpose explicit and traceable, enabling:

- Alignment validation at every level
- Conflict resolution through purpose appeal
- Emergent strategic consistency

### Why Logos?

Unstructured agent communication devolves into noise. Logos enforces rational
discourse through:

- Spec-driven dialogue (OpenSpec format)
- Structured reporting protocols
- Level-appropriate context filtering

## Examples

See `/examples` for:

- Simple web app initialization
- Existing codebase integration
- Multi-platform usage demonstration

## Contributing

See [CONTRIBUTING.md](CONTRIBUTING.md) for how to contribute to this project.

## Philosophy Deep Dive

See [PHILOSOPHY.md](PHILOSOPHY.md) for comprehensive explanation of:

- Aristotelian teleology in software
- Boulding's hierarchy applied to development
- Logos as rational agent orchestration
- Ontological levels and emergence

## Troubleshooting

See [TROUBLESHOOTING.md](TROUBLESHOOTING.md) for common issues and solutions.

## License

MIT License - see [LICENSE](LICENSE)

---

**Transform AI-assisted development from reactive tool usage to coherent,
purpose-aligned creation.**

[GitHub Repository](https://github.com/telos-framework/init) |
[Documentation](https://telos-framework.dev) |
[Report Issues](https://github.com/telos-framework/init/issues)

Commit message:

Add re-initialization safety for v0.6.0
- Detect existing Telos installations before proceeding
- Offer three options: Abort, Reinstall, or Add platforms
- Prevent accidental data loss from config file overwrites
- Add comprehensive detection for all platforms
- 9 new tests for re-init detection (95 total tests)
- Complete documentation in docs/REINIT.md
- Safe to run 'npx telos-framework init' multiple times

README.md, after:

# Telos: Purpose-Driven Multi-Agent Development Framework

[![npm version](https://badge.fury.io/js/telos-framework.svg)](https://www.npmjs.com/package/telos-framework)
[![License: MIT](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-MIT-yellow.svg)](https://opensource.org/licenses/MIT)
[![Node.js Version](https://img.shields.io/node/v/telos-framework)](https://nodejs.org)
[![Tests](https://img.shields.io/badge/tests-95%20passing-brightgreen)]()

A philosophically-grounded AI collective that embeds Aristotelian purpose
hierarchy into software development. Every line of code serves your ultimate
mission.

## Philosophy

**Telos** (Greek: τέλος) means "end," "purpose," or "goal"—the ultimate reason
something exists.

**Logos** (Greek: λόγος) means "reason," "discourse," or "rational
principle"—the organizing intelligence that maintains coherent order.

Most development tools focus on _how_ to code. Telos ensures you're building the
_right_ thing by maintaining alignment between implementation and purpose across
nine levels of abstraction—from syntax to transcendent meaning.

Based on Kenneth Boulding's hierarchy of system complexity, Telos orchestrates
specialized AI agents that operate coherently from low-level linting to
strategic vision. The **Logos orchestrator** uses rational discourse to maintain
top-down purpose alignment and bottom-up validation.

## Architecture

### The Nine Levels

```
L9: Telos-Guardian      → Strategic alignment with ultimate purpose
L8: Market-Analyst      → Business metrics and KPIs
L7: Insight-Synthesizer → User feedback and behavioral analytics
L6: UX-Simulator        → User experience and accessibility
L5: Journey-Validator   → End-to-end workflows and integration
L4: Integration-Contractor → API contracts and service boundaries
L3: Component-Architect → Component design and composition
L2: Function-Author     → Unit logic and TDD
L1: Syntax-Linter       → Code structure and formatting
```

### Logos Orchestrator

The central orchestration engine implementing:

- **Top-down decomposition**: Strategic goals cascade into tactical specs
- **Bottom-up validation**: Implementation validates against purpose
- **Middle-out reconciliation**: Conflicts resolved through rational dialogue
- **Spec-driven workflow**: All changes flow through OpenSpec proposals

## Installation

```bash
npx telos-framework init
```

Or install globally:

```bash
npm install -g telos-framework
telos init
```

## Quick Start

### 1. Install Telos Commands

```bash
cd your-project
telos init
```

This installs Telos slash commands to `.claude/commands/telos/` and sets up
`AGENTS.md` and `CLAUDE.md` templates.

> **Note**: Safe to run multiple times! If Telos is already installed, you'll be
> prompted to choose: Abort (keep existing), Reinstall (overwrite), or Add
> platforms. See [Re-initialization Safety](docs/REINIT.md) for details.

### 2. Initialize with AI

Open your project in Claude Code (or your AI coding assistant) and run:

```
/telos-init
```

The AI will:

- Analyze your codebase (README, package files, source structure)
- Propose a complete 9-level purpose hierarchy
- Auto-generate technical layers (L1-L4) from detected tools
- Ask you to review strategic layers (L9-L5)
- Generate all agent definitions and configuration files

**Time: ~2 minutes** (vs. 10 minutes with CLI prompts)

### 3. Start Development

Your AI assistants now operate as a coherent multi-agent collective:

```
User: "Add user authentication"
  ↓
L9 Telos-Guardian: Validates alignment with project purpose
  ↓
L8 Market-Analyst: Defines success metrics
  ↓
... (decomposition cascade)
  ↓
L2 Function-Author: Implements with TDD
  ↓
L1 Syntax-Linter: Ensures code quality
  ↓
(Bottom-up validation confirms alignment)
```

### 4. Validate Alignment

```
/telos-validate
```

Check that all work traces back to your ultimate Telos.

## Features

### Adaptive Tool Integration

Telos discovers and integrates your existing tools:

- Linters (ESLint, Ruff, etc.)
- Test frameworks (Vitest, Jest, Playwright)
- Analytics (PostHog, Amplitude)
- MCP servers
- Custom tooling

### Multi-Platform Support

Works with:

- Claude (Code, Projects)
- Cursor
- GitHub Copilot
- Google Gemini
- Any AI coding assistant

Single source of truth with platform-specific symlinks—no duplication.

### OpenSpec Integration

Full integration with [OpenSpec](https://openspec.dev) workflow:

- Logos creates proposals for changes
- Agents work through specs and tasks
- Validation uses OpenSpec archive
- Telos lineage tracked throughout

### Technical Agent Delegation

9-level agents can delegate to specialized technical agents from
[Claude Collective](https://github.com/alan-colver/claude-code-collective):

- `research-agent` for technical investigation
- `quality-agent` for comprehensive reviews
- `testing-implementation-agent` for test suites
- `devops-agent` for deployment
- And more specialized agents

## Commands

### CLI Commands

```bash
telos init              # Install Telos slash commands and memory files
telos --help            # Show all commands
```

### Slash Commands (AI-Native)

Use these in Claude Code, OpenCode, or Cursor:

```
/telos-init             # Initialize Telos with AI-driven analysis
/telos-quick            # Fast initialization (auto-accept AI proposals)
/telos-validate         # Check code alignment with purpose hierarchy
/telos-status           # Show current Telos configuration
/telos-reset            # Clear and reinitialize
```

## Project Structure

After initialization:

```
your-project/
├── telos/
│   ├── content/
│   │   ├── TELOS.md         # Your project's purpose hierarchy
│   │   ├── AGENTS.md        # Consolidated agent definitions
│   │   ├── LOGOS.md         # Orchestrator instructions
│   │   └── TOOLS.md         # Tool registry and mappings
│   ├── agents/              # Individual agent definitions (L1-L9)
│   └── templates/           # Platform-specific configs
├── .telos/                  # Runtime state (gitignored)
├── TELOS.md                 # Symlink for visibility
└── [platform symlinks]      # CLAUDE.md, .cursor/rules/, etc.
```

## Philosophy & Theory

### Why Hierarchical Agents?

Flat agent collectives lack governance—agents can work at cross-purposes.
Hierarchical organization with clear level boundaries ensures:

- Strategic coherence (top-down)
- Implementation integrity (bottom-up)
- Efficient specialization (right tool, right level)

### Why Telos?

Without explicit purpose capture, AI assistants optimize for immediate requests,
not ultimate goals. Telos makes purpose explicit and traceable, enabling:

- Alignment validation at every level
- Conflict resolution through purpose appeal
- Emergent strategic consistency

### Why Logos?

Unstructured agent communication devolves into noise. Logos enforces rational
discourse through:

- Spec-driven dialogue (OpenSpec format)
- Structured reporting protocols
- Level-appropriate context filtering

## Examples

See `/examples` for:

- Simple web app initialization
- Existing codebase integration
- Multi-platform usage demonstration

## Contributing

See [CONTRIBUTING.md](CONTRIBUTING.md) for how to contribute to this project.

## Philosophy Deep Dive

See [PHILOSOPHY.md](PHILOSOPHY.md) for comprehensive explanation of:

- Aristotelian teleology in software
- Boulding's hierarchy applied to development
- Logos as rational agent orchestration
- Ontological levels and emergence

## Troubleshooting

See [TROUBLESHOOTING.md](TROUBLESHOOTING.md) for common issues and solutions.

## License

MIT License - see [LICENSE](LICENSE)

---

**Transform AI-assisted development from reactive tool usage to coherent,
purpose-aligned creation.**

[GitHub Repository](https://github.com/telos-framework/init) |
[Documentation](https://telos-framework.dev) |
[Report Issues](https://github.com/telos-framework/init/issues)
